---
title: Summary
filter:
  - erb
  - markdown
---
Professional Summary
---

A highly-motivated professional software developer, with a proven track record of developing software through all stages, from idea to deployment. My current areas of focus are ReST web services and Ruby.

Accomplishments
---

 - Re-architected an existing infrastructure to be more scalable and maintainable, as well as achieved and order of mangitude improvement in processing capability. 
 - Supported and encouraged a team to transition to using automated unit and functional testing where there previously was none.
 - Successfully changed a team to using agile methodologies for software development, replacing the previous ad-hoc methods.
 - Created specifications from (sometimes ambiguous) customer and business stakeholder requirements.
 - Participated in design and implementation of a complete rewrite of a open-source project. Currently one of the lead developers, and mentor newcomers and developers in contributing.

Skills
---

 - Extensive experience with a wide range of web-related technologies including HTML, CSS, Javascript, ReST, JSON and XML.
 - Strong understanding of dynamic languages, primarily Ruby, but also professional experience with Python, Perl, Javascript and Erlang.
 - In depth knowledge of open-source RDMBS software: PostgreSQL, MySQL and SQLite. Also familiar with non-relational DB technologies, such as CouchDB, StrokeDB, and Amazon's S3 service.

Experience
---

 - Senior Software Engineer<br />
   Absolute Performance, Inc<br />
   Boulder, CO<br />
   2006 - Present

 - Senior Web Developer<br />
   Input Output Unlimited<br />
   Indianapolis, IN<br />
   2002 - 2006

Education
---

 - Bachelor of Science (Incomplete)<br />
   Physics<br />
   Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis

 - Associate of Applied Science <br />
   Computer Networking<br />
   ITT-Tech<br />
   Indianapolis, IN

